Now I think a great place to work with the loops is at the bottom of the app.js file, our nice little
printLogHandler.
Right now here, I print the entire array like this
which means that we get output like this which is not super readable. With the loops,
we can actually improve that because now we can loop for example through all entries in the battle log
and output something nicer there but I'll actually start with another loop and that's the normal
for loop.
I say normal because that's the oldest for loop and that also is a syntax you find in pretty much
any other programming language,
not necessarily the case for for/of and for/in but for like this and the while loop, you will find that in
99% of all programming languages you can learn. So for loop is created with the for keyword,
then with parentheses and then you have these three parts in there. The first part is a part where you
initialize things for the loop.
You could run a lot of different code here, basically any expression, so anything but an if statement or
another loop can be executed here, you could call a function in here but typically what you do here
is you initialize a variable, you could initialize multiple variables but in most loops, you'll need one
and that's that helper variable which you change after every iteration to execute code.
So here I'll go with the classic example of initializing i to be zero,
by the way that should be a variable created with let because it will change in every loop iteration
so therefore it's a variable, not a constant,
then you have your exit condition which is evaluated before every loop iteration and there we could
use that example from the slide with i smaller than three which means the loop body will only run
if i is smaller than three
which of course is the case initially since i is 0 and then separated by another semicolon, you have the
code which you want to execute after every code execution, there you can do whatever you want.
You could also omit this by just having a semicolon and nothing thereafter,
side note you can omit every statement here,
then you would create an infinite loop,
you need the two semicolons here though,
now you would have a loop that runs infinitely which is something you should be careful about because
that can crash your browser since it clutters up memory and takes away all resources but you could do
that, in some rare cases you might need that. Here
I don't want that so I will stick to the old syntax and I will also provide a third part here and that's
my code that runs after every loop iteration and there I will increment i by 1.
Again here, you could do different things, you could also say i, i + 2 or i - 3, so you don't
have to increment it but that's the most common use case, that you have a counter which you increment
by 1 and you have some exit condition. You can of course also use values here which are dynamic, for example
here you could use battleLog.length, the length property is available by default on arrays and this
gives you the amount of items in the array and this is actually a quite common way of going through all
items in the array
if you don't want to use the for/of loop which is a bit shorter but if you don't want to use it because
you have to support very old browsers for example
but more on that in the browser support module later in the course, but then you could use this and dynamically
derive the length here and therefore go through all elements in the array by simply having a loop that
runs as long as you have items in the array.
So that's just a side note, here I'll hardcode three
and then for now just console log let's say a couple of dashes here, so that essentially we should print
three lines of these dashes here when we run print log. So let's save that,
go back to the browser and reload,
maybe perform one action and then click show log and indeed you see three lines.
You don't really see three lines here because my browser, the browser developer tools automatically combine
similar outputs but you see the three here
which means it would have printed that three times, it just did merge it together into one output to save
some space here but it printed that three times.
Now you might wonder why three times when we only execute this code as long as i is smaller than
three.
Well keep in mind that we initialize it to be zero,
then we check this, then this code runs,
then we increment it to 1.
So we printed this once thus far,
now i is one, still smaller than three,
so we print this again we increment i to 2,
so now we printed this two times.
Now i is two, still smaller than three
so this condition gets checked and is true
so now we print this a third time,
now thereafter we increment this to three.
Now for the next iteration, this gets checked at the beginning as always,
i now is three, is no longer smaller than three
therefore we exit out of the loop but until this point, we printed this three times which is why we see
the three here.
So that's the normal for loop.
Now as I said, you can configure this in a broad variety of different ways,
for example you could also have a for loop where you start with i being equal to 10 and you want to
go as long as i is greater than zero and then you decrement i for every iteration and then maybe here
we console log i.
You could do that too, you have a backward counting counter now.
If you do that and you click show log, we see 10 9 8 and so on all the way up to 1,
we don't see 0 here because our exit condition is that i should be greater than 0,
so for i
equal to zero,
this will never run
but this is also something you can do and it really depends on which app you're writing and which use
case you're having, which kind of for loop you want.
This by far is the most common scenario, that you start at zero, that you increment and that you then
have a hardcoded or dynamic exit condition here,
so either hardcoded like this or dynamic with something like battleLog.length,
so this is also quite common, to have an array length here as an exit condition but theoretically you
can initialize i to whatever you want, have whatever condition you want to have here, of course also
combined conditions are possible and you can also adjust i or whatever you want to do here in whichever
way you want.
You also don't have to adjust
i here, you could leave this empty as I mentioned and instead, adjust i in here, that would also be possible.
You could do that for example if you want to adjust i
before you do something with it because normally, this part here after the last semicolon runs after
your code here,
so after your loop body. If you want to do the adjustment before that runs, you can omit that last part
and manually adjust like this and now you will see if I reload here and I cancel and click log,
now we count down from nine to zero instead of 10 to 1 because now we increment i before we print that.
So that's all possible,
you have a lot of flexibility there
and I can only encourage you to play around with that. For now
I'll leave it at that because we could spend hours just trying out different combinations here
but that being said, this is the most common scenario
and instead, let's move on to the for/of loop now.